---
page: "report0"
section: "basics-of-massachusetts-zoning"
title: "The Basics of Massachusetts Zoning"
order: 4
toc: true
---
There are two distinct elements to municipal zoning. First is the zoning map that defines the geographic extent and physical boundaries of the zoning districts; second are the municipality’s zoning bylaws or ordinances that detail, in narrative form, the allowable uses, dimensional restrictions, design requirements, and other regulatory aspects of each district.

There are also two different types of districts: base zoning districts and overlay districts. Base zoning districts cover the entirety of a municipality without overlapping each other. Overlay districts, as their name suggests, overlap base zoning districts (and sometimes each other) to add further detail to or change regulatory specifics of the underlying districts. Overlay districts don’t have to cover the entirety of a municipality, and in fact, some municipalities don’t have any overlay districts at all. Some overlay districts provide more flexibility in development or allow higher density; others restrict development in a particular area to protect valued resources; and some are narrowly targeted districts for specific uses such as telecommunications or adult uses.

Another important distinction in zoning is what uses or intensity of development a landowner is entitled to without further review, and what type or form of development is allowed on a discretionary basis.

The former approach is termed by-right, or as-of-right zoning and provides the most straightforward pathway for development as long as a proposal is strictly consistent with the zoning requirements. On the other hand, discretionary processes take many forms and may add considerable complexity to a development process, while also ensuring the municipality has more control over a particular proposal. Special permits have to be reviewed and approved by the appropriate regulatory body (the Special Permit Granting Authority, or SPGA) in the municipality, which may be the planning board, the zoning board of appeals, the city council, or another designated municipal entity. Special permits may be required for a particular use or dimensional flexibility within a zone, or they could apply to all development of a certain type or in a specified overlay district. However, property rights law requires that zoning must permit some economically viable use of each parcel on a nondiscretionary basis. In other words, for every parcel and base zone, there must be some form of allowable development that does not require a discretionary permit.

In addition to the complexity inherent in zoning bylaws and ordinances themselves, the planning and permitting processes for any single development extend beyond zoning regulations and can further restrict what is built, sometimes because of logistical barriers, and sometimes through procedural mechanisms.

For example, other regulatory requirements, such as state wastewater disposal regulations, the Wetlands Protection Act, or local wastewater or wetland regulations may preclude a site from being developed to the maximum amount permitted by zoning; towns without extensive septic networks may have to limit density due to a lack of capacity for wastewater disposal; mitigation requirements or community benefits agreements may render higher density developments financially infeasible; and discretionary processes may simply allow a municipality to reject a proposal largely consistent with the zoning code. The result is that what is built on the ground does not always reflect the written policy in the zoning bylaws or ordinances. As a result, even in districts where multifamily is nominally allowed by zoning, it is often rare due to the obstacles presented by other regulatory factors.