---
page: "report0"
section: "collecting-and-interpreting-zoning-codes"
order: 10
---
In order to collect the information about allowed uses and dimensional restrictions for each zoning district, MAPC reviewed the most current available zoning bylaws and ordinances for every municipality in the region. Before interpreting the code ourselves, we contacted municipal staff in each city and town to solicit their interpretation. That process entailed sending a table pre-populated with known districts, all desired fields, and attribute values from the 1999 MassGIS data, where available. For those municipalities that provided us with data, we used their interpretations as the basis for ours, and then augmented with a review of their most recent code. As with the collection of electronic zoning data, the municipal response to our request was spotty. Most of the fields were populated through MAPC interpretation.

Each municipal zoning bylaw or ordinance, for the most part, covers the same basic information. Elements include allowed uses, multifamily allowances, setbacks, minimum lot size. But there is a wide range of ways the information is presented in the written zoning code, and variety in the specific form and use measures that are regulated. Some codes provide data tables that contain the same regulatory fields for each district in the municipality (see Image 1), while others provide a narrative description or bulleted list for each district (see Image 2). Meanwhile, some codes include regulations both in a table and as part of the narrative. Even the nomenclature varies: some codes present "dimensional standards," others a “schedule of dimensional requirements” or a "table of intensity regulations,” and so forth. This variation in naming makes it difficult to even search for the relevant information in a zoning ordinance or bylaw.

In addition to the variety of zoning code formats, there is a multiplicity of approaches to how development is regulated. For residential districts, some municipalities set forth a minimum lot size for each home or unit; others specify a maximum number of units per acre.

Most municipalities establish certain requirements for setbacks, frontage, lot widths, and other dimensional measures. The impact of these restrictions depends with lot shape and configuration. For example, setback requirements have a greater impact on narrow or irregularly shaped lots than on those that are more equilateral.

For multifamily housing, mixed use, and commercial districts, the approaches are even more varied, often including some combination of height limits, lot coverage limits, open space requirements, setbacks, and (rarely) direct regulation of the floor area ratio (FAR). To add to the complexity, the way these metrics are calculated changes from municipality to municipality. Different codes present different methods for calculating percent lot coverage, height, floor area,

and so forth. Even the definition of something as basic as ‘lot area’ is nonstandard and may exclude wetlands and floodplains in some municipalities, but not in others.

Complicating the patchwork of approaches and regulated metrics is the wide variety of exceptions or use-specific regulations. Some codes set different standards for an individual zone based on the proposed use (IMAGE X). Others have specific requirements based on location for example, for parcels abutting another district, roadway type, or resource area. In some cases, dimensional requirements are a function of the proposal itself. They are based, for example, on FAR with respect to proposed height (IMAGE Y), or minimum lot area per unit with respect to number of units.

These exceptions can be quite numerous and overlapping—in one case a single zone had no fewer than 58 footnotes describing specific exceptions or edge cases. There are also standards such as minimum parking requirements that serve as a de facto limit on density even though they do not do so explicitly.

Finally, the region’s zoning codes are riddled with options that require discretionary approval by a designated authority, whether for a particular dimensional flexibility, use, parking requirement, or other standard. Again, the special permit requirements may only apply in particular cases within a zone, so determining what is permitted ‘by right’ is not even straightforward within a single zone for a single use. While this discretionary process is important to recognize because it influences a great deal of development that occurs in the region, it is so complex and unpredictable that it is not feasible for us to capture the many variations it adds to the data.