---
page: "report0"
section: "creating-the-regional-zoning-map"
title: "Creating the Regional Zoning Map"
order: 8
toc: true
---
Since there is no central repository for municipal zoning data, MAPC contacted representatives of every city and town in the region to request both electronic versions of the zoning map (in <span class="footnote">GIS format<sup class="superscript">2<span class="tooltip">The GIS data that municipalities create to display their zoning districts on digital maps do not necessarily represent the official boundaries of each district; often, those boundaries are delineated with narrative descriptions in the zone code.</span></sup></span>) and bylaws or ordinances. During the initial round of outreach, the wide variety of ways that municipalities store and share their zoning information was demonstrated. Some cities and towns publish their zoning district maps as a PDF map on their website; others publish it via an interactive web map; and a few make the GIS data available on their open data portal. A handful of municipalities employ a third-party consultant to develop, edit, and store their spatial data. We were instructed by municipal staff to contact the consultant to access the data. In some cases, the only way to view a zoning map was by way of a paper copy accessible in town hall.

The responsiveness of municipalities in response to our request for zoning data was uneven, at best. Despite our role as a regional agency, many municipalities were slow to respond or resistant to sharing their zoning data – and there is evidence that we received more favorable treatment than members of the general public. (A <a href="http://www-personal.umich.edu/~rgoodspe/papers/Goodspeed23_2_0.pdf" class="report-section__link">research effort</a> conducted around the time this project began found that, in response to public records requests for zoning or parcel data, more than half of municipalities charged for the data, and many provide it with questionable licensing or reuse restrictions. Others simply refused to provide existing electronic copies of the data in response to the request, claiming they were exempt from public records law.)

We were also fortunate that MAPC works with the region’s municipalities regularly on projects that require referencing municipal zoning data, and for those projects municipalities share their zoning shapefiles directly with us.

Despite our best efforts, the Atlas still is missing up-to-date electronic zoning data for more than a dozen cities and towns. We were simply unable to gain access to data for ten municipalities, though we have reason to believe that updated spatial data exists. An additional six municipalities in the region have made changes to their zoning without corresponding updates to their GIS data. For these municipalities, the Atlas includes the boundaries published by MassGIS in 1999. Using these methods, we were able to create a mosaic of base zoning for all of the cities and towns in the MAPC region.

Collecting spatial data for overlay districts adds additional complexity, as not every municipality has overlay districts, and some have many. We focused our efforts on collecting overlay districts that affect the allowed density of development, whether through allowances for higher density, or restrictions reducing it.

To-date, we have collected overlay district spatial data from 56 municipalities on 260 overlay districts. We have supplemented these overlay districts with spatial data delineating 40R Smart Growth Zoning Overlay Districts, which were provided to MAPC by the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) in March 2020. DHCD’s 40R spatial data is current to 2017. The 40R districts have provided partial overlay data for an additional four municipalities and 12 overlay zones where we didn’t previously have data.