---
page: "report1"
section: "introduction"
order: 3
toc: false
credit: 'Amy Dain'
---
However, this essential coordination across city and town boundaries can only be achieved if zoning and land use policies can be compared across multiple municipalities. Regional and state infrastructure investments and service delivery policies are predicated on forecasts of future growth and development. To serve as a reasonable representation of possible future conditions, these forecasts must reflect the underlying land use controls, which is only possible if there is some regionwide and spatially-explicit (that is, mapped) picture of zoning districts and their requirements.

In 2019, the Massachusetts Smart Growth Alliance published <a href="https://ma-smartgrowth.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/03/FINAL_Multi-Family_Housing_Report.pdf" class="report-section__link">The State of Zoning for Multifamily Housing in Greater Boston</a>, in which researcher Amy Dain examined the ways that municipalities in the region do or do not allow for development of multifamily housing in their zoning regulations. While it may seem, to someone not familiar with the intricacies of municipal zoning in Massachusetts, that it should be straightforward to understand whether a municipality does or does not allow for multifamily housing, the reality is quite different. Dain's research finds that although all but one of <span class="footnote">100 municipalities<sup class="superscript">1<span class="tooltip">Dain did not include Boston in her analysis because it is already producing a tremendous amount of new housing, and because Boston operates under a completely different zoning statute from the rest of Massachusetts.</span></sup></span> in the region technically allow for multifamily housing, density restrictions, dimensional regulations, permitting requirements, discretionary permits, and other barriers are so arduous that it makes building multifamily housing very hard, if not impossible in most communities.

Dain's research also finds some common trends with respect to allowances for multifamily housing in recent years. In the last decade or so, more municipalities are allowing for modest amounts of mixed-use development in their town centers and around transit station areas; more are adding flexibility into their regulations that allow developers to build multifamily buildings through discretionary permitting processes. She also found evidence that many suburban municipalities are allowing and in some cases encouraging substantial amounts of multifamily housing in marginal areas at the periphery of the community, rather than in established areas or near town centers or transit. Furthermore, she found that municipalities are increasingly using discretionary review procedures (such as special permits or 'floating zones') for multifamily development, adding barriers that don't exist when zoning spell out clearly what is and is not allowed at a particular site.

Dain's research shed light on the myriad challenges the region faces in building the amount of housing it needs. She also highlighted the layers of complexity in the zoning codes and regulatory review processes required by municipalities. Her work raises critical questions not only about the extent to which cities and towns are making efforts to meet housing demand, but also whether they are taking active steps to address the racist and classist history of redlining and exclusionary zoning policies designed to keep out less-wealthy residents and people of color. In short, it appears that few communities are doing so, but the full picture has not been drawn.

MAPC's Zoning Atlas adds a critical resource to the conversation: an electronic zoning database that can not only map the boundaries of the nearly 2,000 zoning districts in the region along with their allowable uses, but also accept updates and improvements from municipal staff so it will evolve over time. The data in this atlas can be used by municipal staff to understand how their zoning compares to that of their neighbors, by researchers to begin to answer questions about development in the region, by MAPC to create more accurate land use projections to guide infrastructure investment, and by advocates to shed light on municipalities in the region that hold onto exclusionary restrictions.

It is our hope that the zoning data we have collected, standardized, and made available are used for all of these purposes and more. It is also our hope that the municipal staff who steward their own official zoning boundaries and codes will help us keep this atlas as current and accurate as possible. Our findings and observations should also serve as a call to action for those interested in transparent, efficient governance, as there is much more that could still be done to improve access and comparability of zoning data.